[Music]
i'm howie lu i'm the co-founder and ceo
of airtable
we really think of ourselves as this
platform that lets anybody come in
regardless of industry or use case or
company type and basically build their
own
internal workflows we're the most
meta software product out there because
we're the software to build software
i really do believe that you know we
have 100x plus upside from here
we're never for lack of ideas there's
just such a broad surface area of what
we could do in our potential
it feels kind of like we're trying to
upgrade an airplane that's in the middle
of flying
you should be able to have control over
your own software and make it work the
way you want
[Music]
uh howie let's just jump into it i'm
gonna um let's just not assume everybody
knows
what airtable is so just give us that
like
high level overview yeah i mean the the
the easiest way to put it for this crowd
i think
is we are the bottoms up low code app
platform meaning
you know bottoms up you know is is in
our world you know meaning that we
we're adopted by business end users you
don't have to be technical you don't
have to be i.t you don't have to be a
developer
to come in and build useful internal
applications
um with airtable and low code meaning
you know you're building these real
robust solutions right um you know that
that actually empower
uh you know business processes within
your company
and so that when you think about you
know how broad that can be
like give me some idea of the scope here
because you know help me wrap my head
around that
yeah i mean to to be honest like some of
this was was a little bit of a
serendipitous surprise when we first
launched the product we thought this
would be initially something that really
appealed to more tech startups you know
kind of you think of these
tech savvier crowds that are able to
come in and build
uh you know kind of and be earlier
adopters on on products like this but
what really was was incredible was as
soon as we launched we actually saw this
enormous diversity of use cases popping
up on our table you know we had
hundreds of of sign ups from you know
big companies like connie nast or nike
within the first few months um or
certainly the first year of uh
you know kind of launching as a product
but we also got you know literal cattle
farmers going out and building
you know cattle tracking applications
with air table and so i think
the staggering thing to me was just how
much you know there there is this
distributed amount of what i think of
as software creativity in the world and
um and these people within every company
within every industry every type of
you know organization are just yearning
to go and like build software that they
the way that they want it to work um and
and you know i think we've been
fortunate to be able to provide an
outlet for
for a lot of those use cases yeah so you
had mentioned
a broad range of use cases and i think
maybe some of the people that are
watching
struggle with this i don't know i'm
curious i always think it's somewhat of
a blessing
and a curse to have the ability to do
anything for anybody
so when i think about there there's some
really important horizontal solutions
out there in the world um and as you
thought about this
did you think of it as a blessing or a
curse or as we sort of go into
some of the strategic challenges or
opportunities
that you have some of the people
watching our face how do you think about
being this
horizontal yeah i think it's i think of
the the answer
on time horizons as in you know i think
this is kind of like a marathon where
if if you're really good at holding this
pace and just having this
this deliberate focus on being a
horizontal platform and trying to serve
this massively diverse
you know total addressable market then i
think in the long term you have
more durable advantages i think of a
bigger market to grow into
and an easier path to scale into lots of
different use cases
um so you don't have this kind of market
size risk down the road however
up front there's kind of a cold start
problem you know it is hard to come in
and just say hey this is a you can build
anything kind of platform right you can
build a cattle tracking app you can
build
a video production management system you
can build you know a way to orchestrate
you know kind of your your entire global
marketing
uh process right around launching new
products
um and that just you know the fact that
we're a horizontal platform we're
serving all these different use cases
i think did make it harder initially to
get that running start um
you know notable examples of this
included you know when we went out and
raised
our our first few rounds of funding um a
ton of the investors out there
you know they would basically give us
the feedback of hey we think you're
really
you know you've built this really cool
product it's clearly you know required a
lot of product talent to go and create
something that's
so powerful yet so usable and yet we
think your entire business plan
is fatally flawed by the fact that you
haven't picked a single vertical
to just very crisply defined here's the
exact you know target use case target
persona target company
and here's your go to market you know
sales strategy to to go and and
land those customers repeatedly right
which i think
you know to their credit like there was
some validity to that right because i
think
you know build it and and hope uh hope
that customers come is generally not a
very viable
you know go to market strategy like i
don't think you know you should ever put
in your business plan like we're just
going to build it and hope that people
come
but i think in our case like we we did
you know it required some amount of
effort i think we really tried to study
some of the early adoption that we got
um understand how people were using us
build product improvements to better
serve their needs also doing things like
creating templates that really
created this balance of like being able
to suggest
and give people kind of a launch off
point for specific use cases
yet not bind ourselves to any one
vertical um those all helped but i think
we also frankly got a little bit lucky
right because
every time a new company is launched
there's a little bit of the the guy
being cast
and did you roll a lucky kind of product
market fit or did you not and i think we
we did kind of just start seeing organic
pickup
um and you know in addition to the hard
work of everybody on the team
part of that was luck well let me ask
you it's maybe
a little bit of an aside but i know like
major motion pictures
plan their movies on you but then also
you have this cattle thing like
can you what yeah i mean i think
one of the interesting things is like so
bizarre totally i mean
i think one of the things is you know
that that we are trying to now navigate
is
it's it's a valid point that we should
start you know defining
not the use cases that we exclusively
want to be built on air table or or um
that we want error table be exclusively
used for
um but at least what are the highest
value use cases that for us as a
business
are the strategically most important to
make sure that we continue to to build
product improvements for that we're
serving 100
well um and that we then also start you
know kind of building these
uh increasingly you know kind of
specific go to market efforts
to get out to the market for so while at
the same time we want to maintain
this completely flexible you know
product experience for anybody to come
in
you know for the cattle farmers to be
able to come in and use we're not
necessarily going to go and spend a ton
of effort
just given the the you know kind of
likely size of the cattle farming or the
cattle tracking
you know kind of use case vertical in
comparison to something much bigger like
you know we can land you know every
marketing team in the world that's a
much bigger
vertical and also a strategically
advantaged place to then expand to other
parts of the enterprise
um so you know there's this combination
of like trying to keep the core product
experience as
intuitive and flexible as possible so
that we can support all these long tail
use cases like cattle farming
but then you know starting to layer on
these kind of vertical prongs
of product and go to market
specialization so that we can do a
really good job of going after the high
value use cases
so i think i'm thinking of this
as these are some of the strategic
decisions that you had to make
so a horizontal platform that can do
anything how do you maintain flexibility
and still be able to have an ease of use
for an obvious market and templates were
one way that you did that
and it sounds like you know you continue
to explore that and there's just so many
things that people
in these different areas are doing with
their table so
do you find i know that another sort of
strategic question that people have
on this road to scale is is it bottom-up
adoption
or top-down enterprise sale
and or is it is it one or the other is
it both yeah
and is it you know how did how did you
think of
you know one is this horizontal versus
vertical and i think that would be
helpful like you want to
be flexible yet yet easy
for the biggest use case the second is
like what's your how do you think about
bottom up versus top down yeah
yeah i mean it's a it's a great um
question and a obviously a very
challenging question um you know i think
on the product side
um you know i think it's it's it's
foundational to build a horizontal
product as in
you know it's it's really hard and part
of the reason why we chose to go down
this horizontal route and commit to it
rather than starting with the vertical
and then
trying to make it more horizontal over
time is like i think it's just
foundational that the product experience
you know it's it's in our core dna as a
product to try to take
all of this complexity all of these
things that you can do with the lego
pieces of air table
and distill them into these really
intuitive pieces right to give an
example like
you know in air table you have a few
different primitives if you will right
field types um you have you know
different types of views
we now have things like air table apps
that you can add on top of an air table
database
um there's collaboration features and
all of these
features have to be designed in a really
elegant way that doesn't require
you know reading a support article to
figure out right that anybody can come
in
and just intuit how they can piece them
together to build the solution
in their mind not a solution that we've
already prescribed right so
i think on the horizontal product side i
think that's just foundational and like
we made a real commitment as a company
when we first started
to always put this rigorous focus on on
making that product experience intuitive
and continue to build more power into
the product without diluting or without
like kind of tainting
the elegance of of that onboarding
experience so i think that that's just
core
um on the go to market side i think it's
really interesting you know we hired
our cmo earlier this year she's
incredible she uh her name is archer
agarwal and
uh before airtable she was at atlassian
where she basically helped lead
marketing for a lot of their all of
their cloud
uh you know versions of their products
right um and atlassian is sort of famous
or maybe some people call it infamous
for being like very um you know uh
bottoms up oriented right for a very
long period of company even past
you know ipo and at the point they were
at hundreds of millions in revenue
like the the adage was like no sales
people right um
and you know i think that um and then
you know um perhaps somewhat in contrast
you know we
just had our cro start seth shaw who
whose background was actually in kind of
a more hybrid sales environment
starting with log me in where he was uh
had world wide sales
uh but also worked at companies like
reikan and vision that saw like kind of
more of a hybrid approach
and so i think it's i wouldn't call
these competing philosophies so much as
you know there's kind of good parts of
each of those experiences that we want
to fuse together into like
you know the perfect setup for air table
i think that you know the bottoms up
engine there's no question it's very
high efficiency right like your unit
economics
are just going to look awesome if you do
bottoms up that are listening
you started in bottom up you had that
adoption for sure
yeah i mean we really didn't do much in
the way of outbound sales and marketing
um you know before this year even now
it's still kind of early days
experimental efforts and so
you know the scale that we got like i
mean you know uh early on and even to
this date like
you know we get thousands of many
thousands of organic sign ups per day
and some percent of those convert
through the funnel into active users and
then some of those people just pull out
a credit card
without literally ever talking to a
person at their table right sales or
support
and just start paying us right and
sometimes they'll add more seats and
it'll expand
um and then sometimes they'll actually
reach out to sales and will engage with
them
in more of a reactive and consultative
way but i think there's so many
opportunities to now
layer on top of that high efficiency
bottoms up motion
also this increasingly proactive
enterprise sales motion where
i like to think of it as additive in
value right we're not just trying to
like get
our customers to pay us more money and
use sales as the way to kind of extract
that from them
but quite the opposite i think sales has
this opportunity to actually be
proactive
in presenting ideas for how these
customers can
make more you know uh make more use of
airtable build new use cases or even
expand
to new teams within their enterprise who
could genuinely you know get value out
of building on air tables so
that's a big push for us right now and i
think that um you know
there's kind of a a new s-curve to be
built on top of the existing s-curve
if we can do both so they're not
competing so much as i think additive
so what advice would you give to
founders out there that
start in the bottom up world or
start in the top down like
how long people are like do they have to
do both
is there a time clock like how do you
how do you think about that or what
would you tell
who are watching to think about that
yeah i mean well so there's a great post
i think it came out recently
from um andreessen horowitz on their
blog
uh about exactly this topic you know i
forget the name of the exact uh article
but i think if you search for bottoms up
top down
uh you know the 20 30 million are you
probably find it david george is one of
the authors
um and you know i think it puts it
really well which is look like
bottoms up is great like if you can get
a bottoms up growth engine going
fantastic you've just gotten this like
free source of like you know it's like a
spring that's just shooting out like
free delicious water
um that you don't have to bother
excavating out of the ground right and
you should take it like there's no
question you should take it you
shouldn't try to ignore it or suppress
it
but at the same time it's you know it's
probably not enough in most cases
to provide durable growth for the next
10 years right if your aspirations are
to become
a billion dollar plus revenue business
like it's very unlikely even atlassian
um it has layered in like
real sales at this point um you know
getting to a billion and beyond in
revenue and so
i think um you know it's sort of a
matter of when rather than weather
you you take this bottoms up engine and
not just replace it
or you know build a completely separate
sales engine but i think the best models
are really
you know synergistic where your sales
people
are actually you know leveraging the
bottoms of adoption within an existing
account for us for instance we have
like literally you know tens of
thousands of companies out there
who already have a you know five or
greater seat workspace
uh that's active on air table and so
that's a great seed of adoption that
a sales person can reach out and say hey
like can we help you get more value out
of their table can we talk about like
how to how to set up our table better or
how to deploy it
you know to other use cases um and so
leveraging that bottoms up you know kind
of
uh capability of the product rather than
just saying hey we're going to build a
completely different
top down only you know we're outbound
only sales engine
um that is totally separate right so i
think it's
it's figuring out and it's a whole new
world right i think you know none of
these
um hybrid models i think really existed
in practice you know call it
eight years ago at least certainly i
wasn't aware of them and and so i think
there is kind of this really exciting
kind of renaissance um and this this
conference is a great venue to to kind
of
uh probably learn about it um but uh but
of these hybrid bottoms up top-down sas
models i think that's the future i think
the companies with the best unit
economics are going to have this i mean
datadog is a recent example that i think
has has done this well right they have a
bottom sub activation funnel
if you're a tech startup you want to
adopt datadog you can do so by yourself
but you can also talk to a sales person
and they can also layer on these
you know kind of higher and higher
enterprise uh you know kind of touches
yeah i i think of it too as a when not
an
if and in a way you're trying to build a
giant
burger with two big buns and bottom up
and top down and forget to be
totally like something about that
because i do i think this is the future
so as you go to one of the things that
always impressed me about air table is
um something that i think a lot of
people can learn from who are watching
is how do you think about the category
because
it isn't you know it's it's it's like
something but not
it's really different so how how did you
think about
category creation and how would you
advise people who are watching
to think about categories and how to fit
and how to talk about it and
how to exist and what's really different
for sure well i mean first i wish we had
thought more clearly about it
earlier um you know because i think for
a while we had convinced ourselves that
yeah of course we're a completely
different product from anything else out
there
and it should be obvious to everyone out
there investors and customers alike and
so
like we almost just assumed it was a
given that we were in a different
category right
um and i think we pitched ourselves
often to both customers and investors
as you know we're a software creation
platform that anyone can use of course
that's a new category of course nothing
else out there exists like it right
and while that you know that you know
maybe that's not untrue right we still
do think of ourselves
as a software creation platform that
anyone can use um
i think you know real category
definition
means that you've you've been very
explicit about what are your
alternatives you know
the reality is like not everybody in the
world has heard of airtable or even the
ones who have heard of our table
aren't using it and so if they're not
using air table they're clearly getting
by they're surviving in life in work
life
without air table so what are they using
what are we actually coming in and
competing with and replacing
and how are people thinking about the
value of air table um with respect to
those alternatives right and so
uh one i would just say you know we're
we're starting to get much more crisp
about that i think going into the next
couple years especially as our category
heats up
and we're starting to see more products
that are truly coming after
this category as opposed to you know
always
before there were project management
tools that we didn't really think of as
competitors
and then there were top-down low-code
app platforms like servicenow salesforce
app cloud that are
you know powerful but more heavyweight
i.t adopted that we also didn't think of
as competitors
but we are now starting to see you know
direct competition microsoft has a
product called litz that is
uh in many ways like a direct you know
kind of attempt to replicate air table
we think we we have a lot of product
advantages uh
over that product but um but you know
it's a much more direct play against
their table google has a product called
tables
uh and even amazon just launched
something called honeycomb which is
their their closest uh
you know approximation to the space um
so i think we have to get crisper about
like what is this category
um why are we poised to be the leader in
it and realistically
who do we compete with right um and so
as as we go over the next year i think
those are important questions um and i
have to give a shout out to karen
herself who
i think has has helped us as well as
many companies including facebook and
salesforce in the past
um think about these exact questions
it's i mean it's exciting and we
talked about needing to ground people on
something they already know
because it's hard to be like you get you
only get the ability to explain like one
new thing you can't explain too many
things so there's always this idea of
grounding that's really
important when you think about category
creation and uh that's exactly right i
mean like the software creation
pitch that i described earlier was
faulty because i think
it's not obvious to the average customer
to most customers
why do i need to create software in the
first place right it's not a need that's
burning in their minds now
if they actually figured out wait if i
could build my own software that means i
can
you know build this workflow in this
much more structured transparent
collaborative way
like that would be the value the benefit
right um
you know maybe i can get even more you
know content produced if that's my job
or build products
better with greater visibility into the
progress within
um but you know just saying hey we're a
soft creation platform that wasn't
enough
because it's not clear that people need
that in the first place
yeah yeah no it's one of the things i
love working on the most i mean this
idea of
how do you how do you create and and own
the category or
you know be in an existing category and
win it's really
it's both for everybody it's fun it's
really hard when you're living it so
i i would love to go on to some of the
challenges and bumps in the road
but almost before we do that um i learn
from you in all kinds of different ways
that are not just air tables so i'd love
to like
break it up and shake things up a little
bit and do almost a rapid fire
uh a little bizarre going in the middle
yeah i don't know if i can handle it i'm
gonna ask
you i know what's this i'm gonna but
we're gonna get to the bumps in the road
so just be prepared
next are some of the challenges that you
faced um
so let me just ask you a string of rapid
fire questions um
what's the worst advice you ever got you
know i this is a little bit easy and
maybe unfair but you know i think the
there were so many loud voices
especially from some of the investors
that we pitched that they're still
adamant about the fact that we had to go
vertical right um it was like
you will not it was a definitive
statement of you will not succeed
unless you go vertical and pick a
specific use case and i think it came
from a good place it wasn't mal intent
by any means so i don't want to like
you know um you know be rude about it
but
i think the the net is i think it's a
founder sometimes you just have to trust
your own instinct right like take advice
but also at the end of the day if you
really feel instinctively strongly about
something i think sometimes you have to
just go for it
okay what's the best advice um this
actually i got from
uh mark from facebook uh who i think is
an incredible leader
um but it was you know i i um you know
uh this
we had just seen microsoft launch their
competitor and and the kind of advice
basically was
you know that we tend to overestimate
competition in the short term we get
really freaked out about it
um but we underestimate in the long term
so you know calm yourself down in the
short term
but then like be more paranoid in the
long term about what this really means
over the next five years right even if
their product right now
does or doesn't you know impact our our
uh growth
that's i i think most people miss that i
think they get really freaked out in the
short term and then forget about it
and that especially if it's especially
if it's a big
uh competitor it's best not about it
um do you have a book that helped you as
a founder
yeah so this year in particular i got
really into jim collins
um and the best i think my my favorite
book of a series
is great by choice which is much more
oriented towards high growth startups
than
you know some of the older more
traditional companies but it's an
excellent book that talks about
you know ultimately what what are
actually like some of the the um
the consistent patterns of companies
that become great
you know even in the face of competition
even when there are other companies that
look the same on paper
but one became a breakout success and
the other didn't you know what
what was it that made them successful
yeah he's phenomenal i couldn't agree
more on his writing um what's your
current stress reducer that you can
discuss in public
yeah so long drives um you know i think
especially these days there's no
traffic and um and you know if you ever
need to go somewhere
uh you know i love driving um so i think
it's it's just the right amount of
mental
uh engagement uh but you can really kind
of uh clear your mind
tea or coffee coffee definitely and iced
and multiple cups a day uh which i've
convinced myself is not bad for health i
think there was a study that showed
it actually is linked to a reduction in
heart disease risk so
i'm gonna keep drinking lots of coffee
yeah you can find a study any which way
true well i it makes myself uh it makes
me feel better about it
i'm a big caffeine person too so i look
for the studies that make me feel better
okay do you have a current tv show or
podcast
that's just yeah i just discovered the
a24 the film
distribution companies podcast and it's
really cool because they interview a lot
of these creators producers actors
it's very candid discussion of a very
different industry but yet
you know i think there are some like
inspirational you know kind of patterns
or leaps of creativity that apply
even to tech into sas that's awesome i
didn't know about that they're
incredible on a very different group i
love that
they make some creepy movies too for
sure
okay so let's go back to the hard stuff
um
so as you're thinking about some of the
lessons that you've learned in the bumps
on the road you've been a ceo and a
co-founder for how long now
well you know i'm uh i've been working
on our table for about eight years
um i will say in the early days you know
even if you're called ceo it doesn't
really feel like being a ceo right
because in truth you're just kind of
you're there maybe coding initially or
maybe you're taking sales calls like
whatever it is
and you're just doing anything it takes
to
to get from zero to one right so
yeah everything like so but how has that
changed how do you think about that
i mean i think there's for me it's felt
like there were these really
qualitative shifts in the role every
call at 18 months right i don't know why
it ended up being 18 months and maybe
for some companies it's even faster
or slower but for us it was roughly
every 18 months i would say
um for airtable you know earliest days i
was literally there
you know coding and like thinking about
product stuff like in the weeds along
with uh my co-founders and
our early employees um at some point
after that i think it shifted into okay
like
i need to go out and hire because we're
not we're never gonna you know execute
against the broader opportunity that we
think we can
with four people in a room or five right
um and so a lot of my priorities shifted
to figuring out how to hire
and and then like how to align all these
great people that we had put in the room
and like how do we figure out like
what everybody's working on and so on um
and then you kind of transition again
and again maybe to a manager of managers
which is a different skill set
um trying to figure out how to hire your
first you know kind of
um you know early leadership team within
the company that's still very scrappy
and like able to adapt etc
but a lot of that time you're also still
you know kind of literally the chief
plumber like i remember distinctly there
was a point where i plunged the toilet
of our shared um you know restroom
because we had one restroom we had one
toilet and
you know sometimes you just have to roll
up your sleeves and and uh literally
plunge the toilet right um
so i think like early days was really
just unblocking whatever need to be
blocked
horrible uh unintentional pun there but
unblocking whatever needs to be unlocked
to keep the company running right um and
uh and then like i think
as you get later and for me it's it's
been palpable like over the past year
especially
you get to the point where i think we're
still very early and we're still very
much like the david in this kind of like
battle especially against a microsoft
size goliath
um but we have it now feels like we have
like a pretty
like sizeable comparatively amount of
resources to like certainly early days
right and so
you know we've raised some some funding
we have a few hundred million in the
bank of cash that we can deploy towards
you know hiring or marketing or whatever
we want to do
um and we also i think have the ability
now to
to hire really really great people
across the board whether it's individual
contributors or
execs and so i think it becomes a
challenge for
for the ceo to like you know really
ultimately figure out it's not just
about working hard at this point it's
not just about throwing yourself full
body
at every toilet that needs to be plunged
either physically or metaphorically
but it's about figuring out how do you
get the most leverage how do you do the
things that only you can do
because everything else that you can
hire for and in fact hire somebody who
can do the job better than you had which
i think at this point
you know most jobs within the company
can be done better by somebody else like
you know our cmo is much better at you
know every part of marketing
than i am right now i can still partner
with her to think about you know
particularly tricky part of
you know the messaging of some new
product feature or how we position the
product right
but likewise the same would go for you
know many of our other leaders
and and so then i think it becomes a
question of figuring out like what can i
uniquely do and it's partly hiring the
right leadership team especially
building the right cultural practices
and standards and like you know
defining what the culture of the company
is defining are you a
performance-oriented culture
or not um you know and there's no right
answers to these things right but what
works for for this type of company
um you know i think making the bigger
creative leaps
um that i think sometimes like you know
a founder ceo can do on
instinct um you know and sometimes that
instinct is wrong but sometimes it's
right and you can't prove it
but you know that's what strategy is
right you know making a big bet that
we don't just want to compete against
project management or productivity tools
but we need to keep pushing into
building a platform ecosystem we need to
push into new layers
of value that actually unlock additional
tam for us such as the ability to
customize a ui for instance on top of
air table that kind of thing
so making these bigger creative leaps
and resourcing against them
and then finally i think just
simplifying um that was a surprising
part of the job this year for me was
realizing it's not just about saying
like here's all the things
we can or or could do or should do
but really in fact like you know i think
part of the ceo
as well as the exec team's role is to
help navigate that almost terrifying
expanse of possibilities i mean
especially for us as a product like
there's so many different directions we
could go in terms of product initiatives
and go to market
and so i think the job partly is also to
take
all of that possibility space and
distill it and simplify it into a clear
set of objectives that everybody can
fully align around get get behind
understand and then apply to be more
creative
and innovative in their day-to-day job
right having that context if here's the
simplified frame
of our strategy you know allows every
person within the company
to be more more autonomous and then
deciding what am i going to work on day
to day
so there are a ton more questions that i
have i'm also looking
and i want to make sure we get to
everybody else's questions we have a
number of lined up already in the q
a section and i'll remind people they
can ask more there um
maybe we should go just to some of the
key takeaways
um and and just have a sense of
are there is there something you want to
point out here on the key takeaway
before i go
to some of the audience questions
no i think um i think a lot of them are
self-explanatory
you know the the uh you know the
investors part is pretty important i
think you know
we were very fortunate to always have at
every phase of the company at every
stage of finding uh financing
investors that were one like truly
aligned with the goals of the company
like saw
the massive opportunity you know to be
this really large platform
um you know company rather than you know
for instance more
totally need to understand it's an
actual platform that people are building
on
exactly and that's a very different kind
of business
um and execution path than if you just
want to be a vertical sas solution or a
productivity tool right um
and so i think um having investors who
are very supportive of us basically
swinging for the fences with the
platform play
being patient with with how long that
would take um was really really
important i mean i think
with a different set of investors we may
not have made it right to where we are
today i think we might have gotten
pressured to either sell out early or go
down a more narrow path compete more
directly with project management tools
so
so i think that is a really important
thing to get right and just finding
people who share
both your very human values cultural
values but also the values of the
company and what you're aspiring to
become that's terrific
so i'm going to jump over to some of the
audience questions and i'm going to
bucket them a little bit there are
a number of questions that seem focused
on
the founding so one is can you re-tell
me
uh how this idea came to be and another
question is what was the original use
case
for air table yeah so wondering like how
did you come up with the idea and who
was like the first
person to use it that was outside of you
for sure or
including your friend group i don't know
yeah i mean so so i'll try to combine a
few of these questions um into one
you know the i mean one like you know
the the reason why it took a while for
us to build the product
is because there it was actually a
fairly hard product to build um
you know this was not something we could
hack together an mvp that was working
in a weekend you know we we actually
ended up building
our own real-time relational database
engine
um in order to support the type of
collaboration experience we wanted on
top of it right think about
the innovations that were required to
build the google docs experience
and now instead of just a simplistic you
know kind of word document or like a
spreadsheet even which is
a simpler data structure than a
relational database imagine trying to
build the architecture to kind of
support real-time experience on
a relational database and of course
there's just so much surface area to the
product itself we have collaboration
features we support
a lot of rapid data entry features we
have to support performance you know if
you want to
put larger data sets into air table or
larger use cases so
there was just a lot of work to be done
to build i think the v1 of the product
i think we could have been faster you
know maybe we could have hired more
aggressively
i'm going to interrupt you for those
that can't see it one of the questions
was why did it take 18 to 24 months to
build
so i think howie's looking at like it
did take that long 18 to 20 is that
right
and so yeah it was roughly 24 months um
to go ahead
sorry one second um but uh it was
roughly roughly 24 months i think from
from starting work uh
you know on the project to to uh to
really actually having a product that
was even
mvp testable with with real kind of beta
customers
that being said you know it wasn't like
we just worked in 24 months in a silo or
a vacuum of customer feedback you know
we did try to break it down into you
know first we went out
and to answer the question about the
original use case we tried to very
intentionally
because we wanted to go down this
horizontal path you know it wasn't that
we just didn't talk to anybody
we tried to talk to a diversity of
potential customers even before we had a
product
and just even like did empirical or uh
ethnographic studies on how they used
spreadsheets for a lot of their
workflows how they use existing tools
right
you know people who are in product roles
but also people who are
in you know non-tech roles like
non-profits how do they do programs
management right
looking at small businesses um you know
and so we really tried to first
understand how people use their existing
tool seat to do a lot of these use cases
then we built you know kind of some of
the early mock-ups that were not
functional but like could show you what
the ux of air tool might look like got
feedback on those
and so on and so forth so that you know
probably every four to six months at
least if not more frequently
we were getting some type of validation
and feedback and when we did alpha test
the product
you know we there did also try to get a
diversity of different customers using
it so we did have
you know a non-profit as one of the
earliest users of air table i'm thinking
like
you know if we can get this non-profit
to use airtable for a very complex
program management volunteer management
donor management use case
then you know um we're not just limiting
ourselves to tech startups who are using
it for a very
s subset of uh potential market use
cases
yeah i know that's kind of interesting
to like purposefully not
have a technology company as a as a
first user i bet
gives you some very interesting feedback
totally
that's a that's a common mistake i see
people make is just go from tech
company to tech company um one of the
questions is like but wait how did you
even have this idea
you know i think it really um formed as
this
combination of two two passions um you
know
that i drawn one was you know both my
co-founder andrew and i
you know always had this excitement
around you know like programming like we
had both learned to program
um at at a medium age um probably in
high school
uh for each of us and i think just felt
this like you know sense of like
excitement and delight from being able
to go and just
make stuff right without having to have
any money without having to have any
physical materials
you just go and build something that
would do the thing you wanted right and
that's super cool
um and so i think there was this
emotional excitement around like what if
you could give
everyone that that same experience
without literally having to learn how to
write code and syntax and all this stuff
right
um and then the second piece of it was i
was starting to see especially when i
was at salesforce just the the explosion
of the low code
enterprise market right so companies
like servicenow companies like
salesforce
itself had had a um you know a app
platform offering called force.com now
appcloud
uh that were growing very very quickly
right it was an exciting time
because enterprises were sort of
adopting this platform um
you know to go and build all these long
tail these edge applications as they
called it use cases that were not your
you know traditional crm or your erp use
cases but all of the other application
needs within the interprets that were
just being unfulfilled and so
it was clearly like kind of a good time
in the market to kind of create that
sort of value
and so we just you know it almost felt
like an intuitive
you know um piece of logic of well okay
there's clearly this growing need this
this kind of growing market for low code
but also there's this opportunity to to
almost low-end disrupt it and make it
something that it doesn't have to deploy
but a business end user can just go and
figure out if it could just be intuitive
enough
um so that was kind of the thesis and we
just started working on it um and a
couple years later it uh it launched
you were saying it took 18 to 24 months
like of work
because it was totally needed hard work
until until 4 00 am some days
the you know overnight uh coding
sessions for sure
yeah there so one of the questions is
what do you attribute the bottom up
adoption to
so if we look at it like what was it
that made people excited and started
adopting and you know are there any
lessons that people can take from
from what you experience yeah yeah i
mean i think
um one thing stuck with me when i read
recently about the origins of nps and
i'm sure we've all heard about nps but
uh what was surprising to me it was like
where did mps come from is it just some
random thing that somebody decided to
like slap at the bottom of the screen
say like how likely are you to recommend
this product to a friend or a colleague
right
zero to ten i think we've all seen it
right and um
but what's really interesting there's an
article i think it's it's uh
published in hbs uh by the person who
co-invented
mps and it was actually done while at
bain consulting so bain
uh kind of like invented mps and
originally um
it was done for a a rental car company i
think uh i can't remember it was avis or
something
and what they actually found was that
mps score
actually turned out to be a better
empirical predictor
of long-term revenue growth for for a
chain
or for a location of rental cars um
than any other like more obvious metric
right according to this this story um so
like you could look at you know customer
satisfaction scores you could look at
repeat transactions you could look at
volume of transactions and apparently
nps was the best predictor of
long-term growth and the theory is
basically that
you know the most durable form of
customer retention
and even customer virality is if
somebody likes it
so much you know loves your product so
much that it's not just fulfilling
a utility need for them but they're
willing to put their social credibility
on the line
by saying to somebody else their
co-worker or a friend
that this is a product that you should
try you you should use it right because
that's a different level of social proof
um and so i think for us you know in in
some ways like this is kind of where we
got lucky because like you you try
your your your very best to build an
awesome product and to build great
marketing around it et cetera but at the
end of the day you just you know you
can't
guarantee that the customer base is
going to react
you know with a high mps score to
territory you're going to cross that
threshold of
being somebody something that is so
deeply valuable
and also emotionally exciting to a
customer that they're willing to go out
and talk about it and
i think we were fortunate to get that
like if you even go back on twitter to
the earliest days of airtables launch
you see a lot of these people who are
actually going on to twitter and saying
not just hey this is a fun new product
but wow this is like totally changing
the way i run my business and it's
transformative it's awesome
i'm telling everybody about airtable and
so i think really if you can
watch mps and you know if you can really
put in the the kind of um
all-encompassing effort
to get the product to a point where it's
deeply delightful and deeply empowering
um to the market uh to the customers
then i think that's how you get this
viral spread
awesome so when you so to answer so that
was one of the questions was how
did you have this early the another
question that i'm seeing is like
was there a moment and you know some
anecdotal thing that happened or
a stat or something that can't be that
said like now's the time where you have
to have a top-down sales
so we're still not doing like true
top-down sales where we're going in
up front and without any organic
adoption in an account
saying to a cio or to you know an exec
buyer
hey wouldn't you like to buy 20 000
seats of air table all at once right
without trying trying uh trying it
within any of your departments
um so like and i you know some companies
can do that like great for them and
and um you know that's just a different
go to market model but for us
really the the layering in of any kind
of enterprise sales team
really was was a pool it was it was a
reactive
effort because we were seeing all of
this viral adoption
within enterprises and sometimes we
would have even within one account
multiple teams each pulling out their
credit cards and paying for air table
sometimes substantial amounts for air
table tens of thousands of are
per team and multiple teams across the
account to the point where
the aggregate value of usage was pretty
big and growing and so sometimes at that
point the teams would actually come to
us and say hey like
i think we have a lot of people at our
company using airtable
like you should probably talk to our i.t
department or procurement
just to like get some kind of officially
sanctioned centralized you know kind of
deal going on right
um and so a lot of it early on was
literally what we call hand raisers
where like our customer
had already discovered air table they
had validated air table and they just
raised their hand and said hey we need
to talk to a salesperson because we
gotta get through this so
for us it was very much pulled into it
but i think that there are opportunities
as i mentioned before now to become more
proactive and to actually
step in even before that customer has
said hey i want to talk to sales
and try to offer a value ad sales
conversation earlier so
you're already using our table maybe
you're on the free plan maybe you're a
small paid customer
but hey you know can we help you get set
up even better and can we help you
ultimately expand to other teams that
can also get value out of their table
yeah yeah so that also one of the
questions
uh was a clarification question on what
do you mean by horizontal do you mean
different industries or do you mean big
company
small company mid-size are you talking
size of company are you talking industry
when you
think about horizontal we kind of mean
three things
all at once which is size of company so
we we serve
smbs as well as really large companies
right like we have
multi-million dollar ar accounts um with
thousands of paid seats
uh which obviously only happens in very
large enterprises but we also have like
literally five person
smvs that are only five people to begin
with their entire company
and they're using airtable right and so
it is both company size
it's also industry you know we see the
cattle farmers to
media and entertainment companies to
retail companies to non-profits to
you know even like traditional industry
companies that you might not expect
right travel companies um
uh you know so many different industries
partly because i think the need for
you know a a custom internal
you know collaborative application to
automate or to better streamline
a business process of any kind within
any department is sort of universal it
doesn't matter what company you're in
and a lot of these companies are using
spreadsheets to try to approximate that
right now it's
which is a very imperfect and messy
solution so you know the need is very
universal
and then finally even use case um so
it's not just like it's all project
management
but in fact it's very different use
cases and sometimes we actually compete
against different vertical solutions you
know for content production type use
cases
there are a few dedicated vertical tools
that we compete with sometimes and we
win
when we do on on flexibility on being a
more horizontal platform that they can
customize
to their exact setup yeah i mean you
would talk about really being clear
on what your key differentiators were in
terms of the flexibility and elegance
and being true to that
even as you build other things or
or focus on making certain um
user case cases easier so but i would
also just make sure people understand
their key differences and be very
true to them which for sure this is
another question
um when you were you know you are
building a platform company like
airtable is a platform
yep it's not this one-off app it's not
it's a platform so you had given one
piece of advice which was make sure that
you the people who are funding you are
aligned with the vision
yeah because you're on a journey
together yeah or other advice
uh other pieces of advice that you can
give people as you think about
embarking on you know the journey that
would be a platform
yeah i mean i think sometimes it's about
figuring out like what are your right
metrics
um and this is still something that
we're struggling with or figuring out
now you know but
i think with a platform business you
really want to resist the temptation
to just optimize for the visible
short-term metrics like revenue for
instance you know obviously we care
about revenue
we've been lucky enough to grow our
revenue and like we can justify
you know i think fund raises et cetera
on our revenue
but i think there's also this extra x
factor
of revenue alone doesn't mean you have a
platform business in fact quite the
opposite like vertical sas businesses or
or just you know kind of non-platform
sas businesses
can maybe even like do a better job of
scaling near-term revenue because
there's a clearer sales motion
clearer use case that you're nailing
there's a platform kind of it's a
chicken and egg right you're building
this network effect and that sometimes
takes time
but as it builds up it becomes
unstoppable and so
you're kind of um i think what's really
important and we're what we're trying to
figure out is
what are the best metrics that can
capture not just the near-term results
the output of the business
but also these leading indicators of
like what is the size of that network
effect and maybe it's for us
like it could be the number of active
applications third-party applications
that have been solved by our customers
or it could be
the number of active um you know kind of
solution partners who are actually
helping clients
implement airtable right um you know or
so on and so forth and
uh and so i think you know figuring out
what are the right metrics that capture
the beginnings of network effect value
and making sure that you're investing
into those because
down the road that presumably they're
going to pay out and be visible in
revenue right they're going to give you
more durable revenue growth and a better
strategic
advantage in the competitive landscape
uh but in the near term if you only
optimize for revenue
you may under invest in those things
yeah yeah
that's really really true there's this
short-term
long-term continual so i think we've
answered
these two questions that i see here i
want to ask
um if you were to go back in time howie
go back years ago and you could talk to
your younger self
your 10 years ago younger self what
would you tell them because you were
like
about to embark on this no it's only
been eight but yeah
yeah what would you tell yourself i know
i'm like
surprised you know i i think a lot um
you know in a way like even like even
rewinding two years feels like an
eternity because i feel like
you know i almost cringe at how little i
knew
a year ago and i know that i'm going to
cringe again in a year when i look back
oh wow i really didn't know anything so
i think part of it is just you know
stressing the importance of
learning as quickly as possible i think
is the most important skill set that any
founder ceo
or any founder in general like can have
because you don't know
everything you need to know to run this
business and you never will
but like the only thing you can try to
do is just like you know swallow all the
knowledge that you can
like a whale streaming through the ocean
and just like collecting all this water
and
and like you know i think just trying to
like learn on a rapid
on a rapid course i think um
actively seeking out you know sources of
advice
mentorship etc is really really crucial
right i mean it's almost like
investing in your own personal growth
much like going out and actively
soliciting you know venture investment
for capital right but like your own
personal growth
to be able to figure out what it takes
to kind of run the company
every next phase is going to be so
crucial right because you don't know
like we didn't you know i didn't know
um what it took and i'm still learning
um so um so i think that's that's a huge
part of it
and then i think having the right
balance of patience
yet um impatience right an urgency um i
think in some regards
we were correctly patient in building a
horizontal business right like we didn't
you know we resisted the temptation to
do something quicker and easier and
maybe just switch into being like
a project management tool right um early
on that could have been like a six month
effort instead of like a two and a half
year effort to build before launch
um you know at the same time i think i
would have stressed in myself a greater
sense of urgency
because i do think even while going
after the horizontal play we could have
done things faster you know like
and not by like working to 6 a.m instead
of 4 a.m every night
um but instead by like putting more
focus on how do you get leverage
as the founder right um how do you go
you know can you hire
eight more great people so that instead
of four great people working on this
until four a.m every day you can hire
eight more people and then maybe you
don't have to work until four a.m right
like even working until 1am
will still get you you know kind of
faster progress right so
finding ways to get more and more
leverage early on i think we could have
accelerated things
um but uh but you know it's hard to a b
test the the pass as well so who knows
um well thank you i believe our timeline
i just wanted to check yeah time flies
um you guys got through all the
questions which is great thank you both
so so much how it was great to learn a
little bit more thanks everyone for
having us this was a lot of fun
karen amazing moderated discussions and
thanks for moving us
along as a reminder the recording will
be available on saster's youtube channel
so make sure you subscribe i dropped the
link in the chat
and the slides from today will also be
posted on sasser slideshare so watch out
for those and thanks everyone for
joining us this is closing out scale and
our last event of 2020.
we will see you for build in 2021